# Chapter Four: Branching and merging

---

In this chapter:

- Managing Git branches
- Merging commits between branches

---

Until now, we've been committing our changes on the default branch Git provides, called "master". This is a good starting point for most projects, but as your needs grow more complex, Git "branches" may become useful. In the previous chapter, we discussed how a Git repository contains many branches, which contain many commits. While that remains true as you begin to add more branches in your repo, the fact is that Git commits can exist on any number of branches at the same time.

Let's use a more concrete example inside of "sample-repo" to understand how Git branches work. Begin by running `git branch`, where you'll see that our only branch is the default one Git created for us, `master`. We'll begin to use the repo as a space to store lists of various kinds. Create a new file called "groceries.txt.", and in your text editor, add a couple random items:

```
- Apples
- Bananas
```

As in the last chapter, add the new file with `git add groceries.txt`, and then commit it: `git commit -m "Add groceries.txt"`. Say that over the next couple days, we want to add another list of movies to watch, while still updating our grocery list. This is a great opportunity for a branch. Let's create our first branch from master with `git branch movies`. Run `git branch` again to see our new branch has been created:

```
$ git branch
* master
  movies
```

Notice the asterisk, which indicates that our current branch is `master`. Let's move to the `movies` branch, by running `git checkout movies`. The `checkout` command sets the current branch or commit that Git is stopped at. If you're curious at any time, run `git checkout <sha>` with the SHA id of any previous commit to find that Git will essentially rewind your project's history back to that point in time. For now, we'll stay on `movies` and add our new list. Create "movies.txt" and add a couple movies to it:

```
- Shaun of the Dead
- Hot Fuzz
- The World's End
```

Again, add "movies.txt" and commit it: `git commit -m "Add movies.txt"`. At this point, we now have two files: "groceries.txt", and "movies.txt". Note that in our `git log`, we also will see the two commits introducing these files: "Add groceries.txt", and "Add movies.txt". Because we created the "movies" branch *after* the groceries commit, it contains that commit as part of its history.

Let's checkout the master branch again: `git checkout master`. You may be surprised when running `git log` or simply checking the list of files in our repo to find that "movies.txt" is gone. (Not surprised? Kudos to you!) This is because we've essentially "changed lanes": the `movies` branch exists (along with our list file), but since it lives parallel to `master`, "movies.txt" is nowhere to be found.

At this point, let's learn the final part of managing Git branches: merging. Run the command `git merge movies`, and notice the output. Our `master` branch has been "fast-forwarded", and "movies.txt" now exists next to "groceries.txt". In `git log`, we can see that the "Add movies.txt" now lives on `master` as well. In a sense, we've "merged" these two parallel lanes.

Merging branches is a killer feature of Git. That being said, merges are not always as simple as the above example. Let's learn how to deal with a "merge conflict", when two branches have conflicting information. Create a new branch for another store (`git branch other-stores`, `git checkout other-stores`), and update "groceries.txt" with a couple more items:

```
- Apples
- Bananas
- Eggs
- Yogurt
```

As always, `git add groceries.txt` and commit (with whatever message you'd like). Now let's go back to `master` (`git checkout master`). We've picked up bananas now, so let's remove them from our grocery list:

```
- Apples
```

Commit the changes to "groceries.txt". Now let's merge our branches together (`git merge other-store`). While Git tries to automatically merge the two branches, it finds a merge conflict in "groceries.txt". Let's take a look at the file:

```
- Apples
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
- Bananas
- Eggs
- Yogurt
>>>>>>> other-store
```

Reading merge conflicts is a bit of an art form, but this example is small enough that it should be easy enough to pick up. At the top of our list is "apples": that item appears in both branches, so it isn't the conflict. Below that is Git's automatic formatting for a conflict: a `HEAD` section, and a `other-store` section. In Git, `HEAD` is a representation of the current branch; specifically, the "tip" of that branch. Since our branch is a series of commits, `HEAD` is short-hand for the most recent commit. The command `git checkout <sha_or_branch>` learned earlier is best translated as "set `HEAD` to <sha_or_branch>". Moving on, `other-store` is the name of our other branch, and in this case, we're merging the current `HEAD` with the tip of `other-store`.

Notice that in the `HEAD` section, there's no text. That's because `master` currently has *just* apples in the list. In `other-store`, not only do we have the bananas item that was removed, but the two additional entries that we added. In this case, the way to merge is clear: remove "bananas", and leave eggs and yogurt as the second and third items in our list, respectively. Also make sure to remove the additional text Git has included in the groceries file - in a program, those lines will probably make the code execute incorrectly. Our final version of the file should look like this:

```
- Apples
- Eggs
- Yogurt
```

We've now resolved the merge conflict. Run `git add groceries.txt` to add the fixed version of our file, and then `git commit` to finish the merge. You'll notice that the commit message has been filled out for you, with the default "Merge branch 'other-store'". Below that, a list of the conflicting files has been included. This part is optional, if you'd like to keep a record of conflicts - I tend to keep it, along with the rest of the default commit message.

The sad reality is that most merge conflicts are a lot more complex than this. When working with other people on a project, it's important to try not to step on each other's toes. It can be easy in the relative safety of your own branch to do whatever you'd like, but when merge time comes around, it can become a massive headache. Note that when using tools like GitHub to manage merging branches, it will tell you when branches are unable to be automatically merged. Check out the other branch and see if you can find the conflicts ahead of time, to save yourself a headache in the future.

---

Questions:

- What command creates a branch in Git?
- What is `HEAD`?
- What command sets `HEAD` to a branch or commit?

---
