# Chapter One: Learning the ABO way

This book is not designed to be a comprehensive guide. While it *is* about the version control system Git, finishing this book will not give you complete mastery of the tool. This is intentional. Git is an incredibly extensive piece of software, with the capability to handle essentially any situation thrown at it. The truth is that using Git day-to-day for your projects (software or otherwise) involves knowing only a fraction of Git's abilities. Instead, we'll learn just a bit of Git (or *ABO*) - the namesake of this book, and a concept that I've found incredibly useful in rapidly understanding topics of various disciplines. The phrase *ABO* is my interpretation of the more commonly known **80-20 rule**.

In 1896, the Italian economist Vilfredo Pareto published "Cours d'economie politique" (loosely: "Course of Political Economy"). In this paper, Pareto outlined an interesting mathematical property: 80% of the land in Italy was owned by 20% of the population. Later, Pareto found the distribution again in his garden, where 20% of the peapods yielded 80% of the harvested peas. We now know this as the **Pareto Principle**, or the **80-20 rule**.

The 80-20 rule is incredibly applicable to how we learn. While the distribution isn't always exact, the conclusion is clear: by focusing on the valuable 20%, we can become 80% effective or knowledgable in a desired discipline. Not only should the initial 20% cover most of your needs day-to-day, it also will enable you to pursue the other 80% with relative ease.

In the case of learning Git, this distribution is probably even more drastic - using the tool day-to-day involves the same five to ten commands repeatedly, which can be taught in only a couple hours. Not being aware of this has falsely given off the impression that Git is incredibly complicated, and isn't worth learning. On the contrary, most of Git is quite easy to understand, given the right mental model, and the right instruction. Learning Git is wonderfully productive to almost every aspect of project management, especially with software projects.

Git is a version control management system. A good way to envision this is by imagining a single file on your computer, perhaps a list of groceries. File systems, of course, will hold on to this single file, and by opening the file, you'll see the latest version of the file. But what if you want to go back and look at earlier versions of that file? Instead of needing *just* that file, you now are looking to manage *multiple versions* of the same file. Git, and other version control systems, solve this problem by intelligently handling *all* the versions of your file in a memory and perfomance-efficient way.

Version control systems (VCS) are not new, and Git is simply another VCS in a long line of systems that have existed for decades. So why is Git almost inarguably the most popular system in use today? Simply, it is almost impossible to make a mistake when using Git. If you use Git to regularly track your file changes, it is unlikely that you will ever delete a file completely, and given a situation with multiple users, merging changes can be almost effortless. All of this comes at a price, of course: managing your project with Git is marginally more work than just saving files normally, but the benefits are innumerable - I guarantee it will change your project development process for the better.

The format of this book is tailored to help readers successfully learn Git quickly and effectively. Each chapter begins with a brief summary of key principles, and ends with a couple questions to gauge your comprehension of the chapter. A small amount of time will be spent on installing Git, but most of our work will be hands-on working with Git itself. Instead of talking about the innards of Git towards the end of the book, we'll turn our focus to practical examples of how Git users interface regularly with other users, and tools like GitHub.

This book also benefits from additional materials included: a screencast showing my day-to-day Git workflow, the sample project used in this course, and a brief writeup of some of my favorite auxillary tools to use with Git. You can find these on the "A Bit of Git" section of my website: http://kristianfreeman.com/abitofgit.
